Physical Control of the Mind
============================

Toward a Psychocivilized Society
--------------------------------

### Acknowledgments

Since the beginning of my studies at the Madrid School of Medicine, I have been inspired by the memory of the Spanish histologist Santiago Ramon y Cajal and by his conception of the central nervous system, his penetrating advice about how to conduct scientific research, and his philosophical ideas about life and death. Sixty-five years ago, Cajal said that knowledge of the physicochemical basis of memory, feelings, and reason would make man the true master of creation, that his most transcendental accomplishment would be the conquering of his own brain.

My personal background is the usual rather specialized one of a biologist, but I have been compelled to venture beyond the limits of my science by the need to evaluate the experimental reality of motor behavior and mental phenomena directed by electrical and chemical stimulation of functioning brains. I have also felt the anxiety of our age, which requires a better understanding of the cosmological situation of man in order to give a rational and emotional purpose to human life; and I have been concerned by the urgent need to resolve archaic human antagonisms and to find a new conviviality based on biological reality rather than on wishful thinking. As T. M. Hesburg, president of Notre Dame University, has said, "Scientists cannot be neutral." We must understand the social responsibility attached to our research and the moral impact it has on the world of men, including ourselves. At least there is novelty in looking at behavioral manifestations not from outside the organism but from inside the spiking neurons where information is interpreted and responses are organized.

This book was begun during a sabbatical leave of absence from Yale University under a Guggenheim Fellowship. Part of its content was presented at the New York Academy of Sciences in December 1968 as Salmon Lectures. Dr. Paul Weiss' Rockefeller University evaluation of the preliminary manuscript was very helpful. Economic support for my research has been provided by grants from Foundations' Fund for Research in Psychiatry, United States Public Health Service, Office of Naval Research, United States Air Force 657 1st Aeromedical Research Laboratory, NeuroResearch Foundation, and Spanish Council for Scientific Education. The experimental material originating in my laboratory has been the work of a group of investigators from different countries to whom I express my warm appreciation. Their names are mentioned in our published work. Our most recent collaborators included Dr. Lembit Allikmets (Estonia, USSR), Dr. Humberto Bracchitta (Chile), Dr. Ronald Bradley (United Kingdom), Dr. Francis DeFeudis (USA), Dr. Taiji Hanai (Japan), Dr. Victor Johnson (United Kingdom), Dr. Diego Mir (Spain), Dr. Rodney Plotnik (USA), Dr. Maria Luisa Rivera (Spain), Dr. Chico Vas (India) and Dr. Jan Wallace (USA).

Ideas and reciprocal influences exchanged with my brothers, Rafael and Alberto, through the years have been important to the structuring of my own mind; the many enjoyable hours of discussion with my wife, Caroline, who has been a close, sensitive, and intelligent collaborator, have been decisive in the creation of this book.

The Salmon Lectures of the New York Academy of Medicine were established in 1931 as a memorial to Thomas William Salmon, M.D., and for the advancement of the objectives to which his professional career had been wholly devoted.

Dr. Salmon died in 1927, at the age of fifty-one, after a career of extraordinary service in psychiatric practice and education, and in the development of a world-wide movement for the better treatment and prevention of mental disorders, and for the promotion of mental health.

This volume in World Perspectives had its original source in the invitation extended to me in 1963 by Dr. Ruth Nanda Anshen to write a volume for World Perspectives Series which she plans and edits. The Salmon Lectures I gave in 1968 were based on the text of a part of this volume.

### Natural Fate Versus Human Control: The Process of Ecological Liberation and Domination

Manifestations of life depend on a continuous interplay of natural forces. Worms and elephants, mosquitoes and eagles, plankton and whales display a variety of activities on the land, in the air, and in the sea with a purpose—or lack of it—which escapes human understanding, obeying sets of laws which antedate the appearance of human intelligence.

In the animal kingdom, existence of the genetic code represents a biological determination of anatomical and functional characteristics in the newborn. The growth and development of organisms after birth proceed according to a natural fate imposed by the correlations between individual structure and environmental circumstances. The fact that about 300 million years ago all the world's creatures lived in the sea did not depend on their own volition but on biological evolution and ecological factors. The appearance of dinosaurs 180 million years ago in the Triassic period, their supremacy on earth, and their peak in power 30 million years later were determined not by the will of these animals, which had disproportionately small brains and were probably rather stupid, but by a propitious warm and sticky climate which provided a soft slosh of water everywhere and land covered with a tangle of greenery, juicy palms, and huge fernlike trees extending almost to the North Pole.

The catastrophic end of the age of gigantic reptiles was simply the result of their inability to adapt themselves to a change in weather and lack of food. At the beginning of the Cenozoic era 70 million years ago, the air was drier and cooler than before. High plains emerged from shallow seas and ponds, and hardwood forests towered in place of ferns and palms. This changing ecology was unsuitable for dinosaurs and because they lacked the intelligence to understand their situation, to improve their food supply, or to modify their diet, natural fate forced these giants into extinction, and in their place small, warm-blooded, furry mammals slowly grew in size and number.

The appearance of man approximately one million years ago meant only the flourishing of one more kind of animal which shared with the others most biological laws and a complete dependence on natural forces. Men, like elephants and frogs, possessed lungs, bones, and brains; pumping of blood by the heart and other physiological phenomena were—and still are—very similar in all mammals, and proceeded according to preestablished mechanisms beyond awareness or voluntary control. Personal destiny was determined by a series of biological and environmental circumstances which could not be foreseen, understood, or modified. Natural fate meant that man, along with all animals, suffered the inclemencies of the weather, being decimated by cold temperatures, starvation, and all kinds of parasites and illnesses. He did not know how to make a fire or a wheel, and he was not yet able to influence the functions of his own body or to modify his environment.

A decisive step in the evolution of man and in the establishment of his superiority over other living creatures was his gradual achievement of ecological liberation. Why should man accept unnecessary hardships? Why should he be wet because the rain was falling, or cold because the sun was hidden, or be killed because predators were hungry? Why should he not cover his body with the soft skins of animals, construct tools and shelter, collect food and water? Slowly the first sparks of intelligence began to challenge natural fate. Herds of cattle were a more reliable source of food than hunting in the forest. Some fields were stripped of the vegetation which was growing according to capricious ecological destiny, and were placed under cultivation by man.

Attention was gradually directed toward the human body, and skills were learned for the treatment of injuries. Broken limbs no longer meant permanent disfunction but could be repaired by transitory application of branches tied with vegetable fibers. Personal experience was not lost, but could be transmitted from generation to generation; the accumulating culture preserved through a gradually elaborated spoken and written language represented a continuous advance of civilization. Men learned to work together, to exchange skills and knowledge, and to join their efforts to improve their circumstances. Curiosity grew continuously, and endless questions were formulated about the observed reality. Ecological liberation could progress not by hiding inside caves but by facing danger, and man challenged the immense power of natural forces, using a lever to lift weights heavier than muscular power could manage, tricking the wind to push sailing ships through the ocean, and taming the rivers to turn the grinding stones of the mills. Thus began the process of man's ecological domination, the victory of human intelligence over the fate of a mindless nature —a victory without precedent in the history of other animal species. Biological adaptation enabled man to survive under extreme climatic conditions including arctic areas, dry deserts, high altitudes, and hot tropics, but it was the intellectual and material development of civilization that really brought about the present degree of ecological liberation and domination. The winning of a considerable degree of independence from natural elements permitted human beings to direct their intelligence and energy toward endeavors more interesting than mere survival. The signs of man's power slowly extended throughout the world, transforming the earth's surface with cultivated fields, with cities, and with roads; joining oceans; tunneling through mountains; harnessing atomic power; and reaching for the stars. In spite of the problems associated with the development of civilization, the fact is that today the charting of our lives depends more on intelligent decisions than on ecological circumstances. The surrounding medium of modern societies is not nature, as in the past, but buildings, machines, and culture, which are man-made products. Modern medicine has created a healthier environment by reducing infant mortality, diminishing the number and gravity of illnesses, and considerably increasing the span of life. According to the biological law of only a few centuries ago, pestilence desolated mankind from time to time, insects spread infections, more than half of the newborn died before the age of three, old age began at thirty or forty, and only a minority survived to the age of fifty. Scientific knowledge has modified our own biology, providing better diet, hygienic practices, and pharmacological and surgical treatment.

Viewing evolution in terms of the opposition of human intelligence to natural fate has a dramatic appeal which emphasizes the relative importance of each factor in the determination of events. In reality, however, we should accept the fact that the existence of man, together with all of his attributes and creations, including his own ecological liberation and domination, is actually and inescapably the result of natural fate. Man did not invent man. No conscious efforts were ever made to design—or modify—the anatomical structure of his brain. Because the development of wings was a result of biological evolution, we cannot claim that birds have liberated themselves from the pull of gravity by flying in the air in defiance of natural laws. The fact that birds fly means that they have achieved one step of ecological liberation, escape from gravity by using the lifting support of the wind. Birds can live and play in the air above all other earthbound creatures. Their wings were a gracious gift of evolution which did not require knowledge of physics, mathematical calculations, or even the desire to own wings. Nature seems to be highly imaginative but excessively slow; many millions of years passed from the beginning of life on earth to the appearance of flying animals. The period from the emergence of the human mind to the invention of the airplane was much shorter. The tremendous acceleration in accomplishments was determined by the development of the unique powers of imagination and reason; and it may be expected that human inventions will have an increasing role in the control of activities on earth. Birds fly, and man thinks. Liberation from and domination of many natural elements have changed ecology, and are also influencing the needs, purpose, and general organization of human life, especially in the following aspects.

#### Freedom of Choice

In contrast with the limitations felt by our ancestors and by members of still primitive societies, we enjoy nearly endless possibilities to pursue interests and activities of our own choice. Modern life is not bound by the physical restrictions of geography; our voices can be transmitted with the speed of light to anyone around the world; on television we can see events in any country as they actually occur; and we can travel to distant lands at supersonic speeds. We are not limited in food intake by our hunting skills. Instead, we may have available a variety of supermarkets which display the culinary products of many countries. In the acquisition of knowledge we are no longer limited to verbal contact, but have access to many centers of learning equipped with increasingly effective teaching aids, where the different aspects of man's recorded history are collected and preserved. We can select from a wide variety of entertainment, careers, ideas, and religions. Even parenthood can be planned, and the birth of children controlled, by the use of medical knowledge and contraceptive devices.

Today our activities are less determined by adaptation to nature than by the ingenuity and foresight of the human mind which recently has added another dimension to its spectrum of choices—the possibility of investigating its own physical and chemical substratum. Limitation and regimentation of our activities are imposed mainly by education, legislation, social pressure, and finances—which are creations of civilization—rather than by environmental determination, as was formerly the case. Civilized man has surrounded himself with a multitude of instruments which magnify his senses, skills, strengths, and the speed with which he can travel, without realizing, perhaps, that in his drive to be free from natural elements, he was creating a new kind of servitude dominated by levers, engines, currency, and computers. The concerns of earlier times for crops and predators were supplanted by economic worries, industrial problems, and the threat of atomic overkill. Despite the tremendous increase in possible courses of action, the freedom an individual enjoys is becoming more tied to mechanization which is replacing the natural environment as a determinant of behavior. Liberation from ecology is paralleled by a mechanized dependence which absorbs considerable manpower for the invention, construction, and maintenance of machines. The possibility of independent behavior is certainly contingent on the availability of different paths of conduct. But the element most essential to its achievement is awareness of the many factors influencing our actions in order to assure us that our responses will not be automatic, but deliberate and personal. As René Dubos has said, "The need to choose is perhaps the most constant aspect of conscious human life; it constitutes both its greatest asset and its heaviest burden" (69).

#### Awareness

The qualities which most distinctly separate man from other animals are the awareness of his own existence and the capacity to resist and even change what appears to be his natural fate. The degree of individual awareness differs according to personal circumstances. Consciousness is a rather expensive luxury in terms of time and effort, and we use it sparingly while performing many daily tasks based on complex series of automatic responses. Walking, for example, requires a tedious process of motor learning in early life, but once the necessary cerebral formulas for controlling movements have been established, we pay no attention to the onset, strength, speed, timing, and sequences of muscular performance; we simply stand up and walk while our minds are occupied with other thoughts. All these processes are automatic and, to a considerable extent, are characteristic of each individual. We can, however, refocus our attention on any motor aspect of walking and re-educate and modify the motor formulas to improve the elegance and gracefulness of movement, or to mimick the gait of sailors, tramps, or cowboys, as actors do.

Stopping at a red light does not require a decision because we are highly trained and conditioned to perform this action. If we pause to analyze our behavior, we may be aware of the motor activity involved in stepping on the brakes and of the reasons that we are stopping and obeying the traffic rules which only then may be questioned or even ignored. Choice is not involved in automatic responses, but if we appraise the reasons and circumstances surrounding our actions, new avenues of response are created. This applies to emotional reactions and social behavior as well as to motor activity.

Awareness is increased by knowledge of the mechanisms of the considered phenomenon. For instance, an expert is likely to notice any peculiar car engine noises, perceiving auditory signals which may not be detected by untrained drivers. Knowledge of the structure and mechanisms of the motor improves the probability of foreseeing and preventing possible breakdowns and also of correcting malfunctioning parts.

To a considerable degree, our behavior is composed of automatic responses to sensory inputs, but if we knew the genetic determinants, cultural elements, and intracerebral mechanisms involved in various kinds of behavioral performance, we could come closer to understanding the motivations underlying our actions. If we were cognizant of the factors influencing our behavior, we could accept or reject many of them and minimize their effects upon us. The result would be a decrease in automatism and an increase in the deliberate quality of our responses to the environment. Awareness introduces greater individual responsibility in behavioral activities.

#### Responsibility

Primitive man did not have the choice of going to the movies, reading a book, or watching television. He was fully occupied searching for food and fighting for survival. Today's many behavioral alternatives require that we make a conscious effort to understand and evaluate the different possibilities, perhaps to modify or repress emotional reactions to them, and finally, to select a course of action. In many cases, these processes are performed at the subconscious level, and responses flow effortlessly; at other times we are aware of an impending act and its possible alternatives, and arriving at a decision may be difficult and tiring. The conscious selection of one path among many places greater responsibility on the individual because his activities are not determined by automatic mechanisms or external factors beyond his control. Intelligent judgment is based on an individual's personal qualities and especially on his ability to evaluate possible solutions. Individual choice entails assuming accountability for the direction of personal destiny, and the greater one's awareness and freedom, the greater the responsibility. In a small social group such as a tribe, the consequences of the leader's choice are rather limited, while in highly organized contemporary societies, the decisions of governmental elites will affect large numbers of people. The political actions of these powerful officials concerning foreign aid, cultural exchange, and peace and war will affect life in most parts of the world. We should remember that decision-making always involves the activity of intracerebral mechanisms which, as yet, are little known.

#### Accumulation of Power

Industrial and technological developments have created unparalleled resources with immense constructive and destructive potentials. Already we have conquered the natural obstacles of rivers, seas, and mountains, and they are no longer insurmountable barriers to the activities of man. At the same time, we have accumulated megatons of atomic energy capable of obliterating all forms of life in the world.

Instruments have been invented to increase a millionfold the perceptivity of our senses, the power of our muscles, and our ability to process information. In addition to increasing our material power, we have greatly improved our capacity to organize and use available resources. Plans for the development of cities, industries, research, education, and the economy in general are carefully formulated by experts, and these plans are essential for the organization and evolution of our society. These developments again introduce the question of responsibility in the choice of objectives to be reached. Because of the magnitude of our material and intellectual powers, the directive resolutions made by elite groups may be decisive for the development of scientific and economic fields of endeavor, for the evolution of civilization in general, and for the very existence of man.

Major nations are constantly faced with the choice of how to use power, and conscious efforts are made to reach intelligent decisions which are expressed as national goals such as overcoming poverty, landing a man on the moon, or meeting timetables for industrial, agricultural, and scientific development. Because our resources are not unlimited, a major effort in one field, such as armaments or outer space exploration, restricts the development of other less-favored areas. The application of human energy to the control of natural forces is continually increasing, and perhaps it is time to ask if the present orientation of our civilization is desirable and sound, or whether we should re-examine the universal goals of mankind and pay more attention to the primary objective, which should not be the development of machines, but of man himself.

### The Imbalance Between Material and Mental Evolution

Originally, philosophy and science were unified in purpose, which was, in the words of Plato, "the vision of truth." They were also unified in their methodological exploration of reality, which consisted of observation and rational interpretation of what was observed. This happy marriage persisted for many centuries until ideological and technological revolutions introduced new methodologies and the need for greater specialization. Unable to resolve the developing differences in outlook and method, philosophy and science separated from one another, tearing apart what had been their common subject of inquiry. Philosophers and theologians carried with them the mind and soul; scientists kept matter and the body, and psychologists as newcomers lived for some time a schizokinetic existence between spirit and substance, without enough scientific recognition or philosophical support.

Mathematics, physics, and chemistry became increasingly important fields of study, and the application of experimental methods to biology was so fruitful that the interest of scholars was diverted from philosophy to science. Why should time be spent in semantic fencing and speculations when important questions could be asked directly of living organisms, rocks, and celestial bodies? Telescopes and microscopes explored opposite aspects of the natural world, and organic compounds were synthesized. The exploding sciences engaged most of the available intellectual and economic resources, directing them toward industry, biology, electronics, atomic energy, outer space exploration, and similar fields of endeavor. In contrast, only a minor effort was devoted to inquiry into the nature of mental faculties. This unbalanced situation was determined in part by methodological reasons. The mind was considered a metaphysical entity beyond experimental reach, and in spite of the obvious importance of understanding the psychological essence of man, it appeared more practical to invent combustion engines or to investigate the structure of cells than to speculate about emotions and thoughts. While it is true that the disciplines of psychology and psychiatry have greatly expanded in our century, a survey of the literature shows that a decade or two ago the brain was still treated as a "black box" which could be reached only through the senses. Psychological investigations analyzed correlations between sensory inputs and behavioral outputs but could not explore the intermediary processes which were hidden in the unknowns of brain physiology. Some authors doubted that the study of neurons could throw any light on understanding properties of the mind. Surprisingly enough, most investigators of the brain also contributed to this unbalanced situation because they studied heavily anesthetized subjects, and dealing with sleepy neurons, they failed to take into account the mental complexity of the waking brain.

The contrast between the fast pace of technological evolution and our limited advances in the understanding and control of human behavior is creating a growing danger. We are facing a situation in which vast amounts of accumulated destructive power are at the disposal of brains which have not yet learned to be wise enough to solve economic conflicts and ideological 0 antagonisms intelligently. The "balance of terror" existing in the present world reflects the discrepancy between the awesome technology and the underdeveloped wisdom of man.

We may recall that many millenniums ago, during the Jurassic period, the gigantic brontosauri, weighing thirty tons and extending over seventy feet in length, reached their peak of power. With their long necks and tails they probably moved gracefully in the water, but on land they were clumsy and consumed large amounts of energy just in moving their weight around. Judged by fossil bones discovered in Colorado and Wyoming, their brute force was overwhelming, but this extraordinary physical power was directed by tiny brains weighing less than 0.5 kilograms. The organization of incoming signals and outgoing messages to keep these huge frames in working order must have occupied most of their brains, leaving little opportunity for more intelligent and adaptive behavior. The brontosauri became extinct because of their extremely limited mental powers; faced with an increasingly unfavorable climate and diminishing food supply, these animals were incapable of adaptation and could not survive in the changing environment. The fate of these giants may have symbolic value for twentieth century civilization, which is also attempting to direct tremendous potential with disproportionately small brains. While our mental faculties are incomparably superior to those of the early land animals, we still lack adequate self-knowledge and control, and natural history teaches that when underdeveloped brains are in charge of great power, the result is extinction. Methods for the re-education and control of social antagonisms and undesirable emotional manifestations in man are urgently needed. While these processes are obviously related to environmental circumstances, they also depend on the activity of intracerebral mechanisms, which should be better known. When primitive man faced natural catastrophes like floods or pestilence, he was helpless and reacted with resignation, despair, or an appeal to supernatural powers. In contrast, modern man, being more perceptive, may decide to study his circumstances and apply his power and intelligence to the immediate problem; by constructing dikes or vaccinating the population, he may prevent or modify the forces of natural causality. It is reasonable to assume that just as more knowledge of natural mechanisms allows us to use and control natural forces, a clearer understanding of the central nervous system should enable us to educate and direct mental activity more intelligently. In a recent symposium concerning the "Education of Biologists for the Modern World," the distinguished investigator Beach (11) lucidly expressed the thoughts of many scientists by saying: ". . . man's greatest problem today is not to understand and exploit his physical environment, but to understand and govern his conduct. ... If he is to survive he must proceed to explore himself and to control his own activities. . . . Science can and must provide the understanding necessary for prediction. ... If science provides knowledge society will display wisdom."

### Mental Liberation and Domination

In the near future we can expect a rapid expansion in applications of atomic power, programed education, and production of machinery, along with higher standards of living and lengthening of human life. Even with this optimistic outlook, we may wonder where progress and technology are leading us.

The United States enjoys an economic level, educational system, and a technological development far superior to those of countries like Spain, Poland, or India, yet it is questionable whether its citizens experience greater happiness, family love, closer friendships, and less fear, anxiety, and psychological pressure than the people in less advanced countries. Neither East nor West has succeeded in resolving human conflicts, and the latest technology is being used to kill thousands of people around the world. If modern civilization with its many comforts does not provide greater individual and social happiness than less advanced societies do, the value of this type of civilization may well be challenged.

We should realize that in spite of our progress in other areas, psychic life and emotional reactions are little known. The solutions to present social conflicts proposed by sociologists, religious organizations, experimental institutes, and the United Nations have had only limited success. This is partly because the usual frames of reference for these solutions have been politics, economics, history, metaphysics, sociology, and psychology, while the basic cerebral mechanisms related to man's ideas, emotions, aggressions, desires, and pleasures have been ignored.

Individual reactions are determined by environmental factors acting through sensory inputs upon neurophysiological processes and are manifested through appropriate motor outputs as behavior. All of these intervening elements must be taken into consideration to understand the responses of individuals. To examine the problem only from outside of the organism, as is usually done, is as insufficient as if we were to ignore the environment and try to explain behavior solely in terms of neuronal activity.

At present, not only is there far greater emphasis on material environment than on the understanding of the mind, but what is even more dangerous, this lack of balance is self-perpetuating through education, economic incentives, and general orientation of civilized life (69). "The danger that the entire culture may become technological is obvious" (15), and the divorce of mind from life which is taking place catastrophically everywhere in the modern world (10) has evoked strong intellectual reactions and is one of the central themes of existential philosophy. Present civilization is geared to produce more and better machines and to increase physical power rather than to facilitate individual happiness. Most of our time is spent in performing technical skills, being transported by motorized vehicles, being entertained electronically, and in other occupations which reflect our increasingly mechanized environment.

The purpose of education is to further man's knowledge of himself and his surroundings through instruction in the arts and sciences. During the last few decades, technical fields of study have multiplied rapidly, overshadowing the humanities which until this century formed the basis of education. Although such information is increasingly available, scant effort is devoted specifically to providing an adequate foundation for self-knowledge or for the intelligent construction of individual personality. A curriculum may teach a student something about evolution and general physiology and may introduce him to various aspects of his cultural inheritance, but it usually explains very little about the most important organ, the brain, which alone is responsible for man's emergence as a unique anthropoid and on which every person must rely for immediate survival and future development. Study in the realms of philosophy and introspection is generally considered a nonessential diversion not directly related to the preparation of future members of the industrial society, and the inference that "man can succeed better in this world if he doesn't invest much time learning about his relation to it" further promotes the divergence between the technical world and the world of ideas. This pedagogic deficiency was understandable in the past, when psychophysiological knowledge was limited, but today science is providing the means to coordinate the diverse fields of philosophy and biology to form a new basis of inquiry into the nature of man. This is no longer a purely speculative endeavor but an exploration in a new direction already blazed with scientific landmarks. When present knowledge about the physical substratum of the human mind is disseminated in centers of learning, man will be better equipped to utilize his mental powers and to relate effectively to his environment, and the needed balance in orientation may be achieved.

This is our alternative: to accept, enjoy, and promote the increasing material progress without investing much hope or effort in an attempt to understand our power center, the brain, or to modify the present direction of civilization by shifting part of our available intellectual and economic resources toward an investigation of the mechanisms of mental activity. This redirection of goals could produce an evolution of the mental quest similar in significance to the processes of ecological liberation and domination which have already occurred.

The thesis of this book is that we now possess the necessary technology for the experimental investigation of mental activities, and that we have reached a critical turning point in the evolution of man at which the mind can be used to influence its own structure, functions, and purpose, thereby ensuring both the preservation and advance of civilization. The following pages contain a discussion of what the mind is, the technical problems involved in its possible control by physical means, and the outlook for development of a future psychocivilized society.
